Now let's look at how we can build inbound and outbound gateways for RabbitMQ.
Recall that inbound gateways allow you to receive a
message and return a response.
And outbound gateways allow you to send a message and receive a response.
To Integrate with AMQP,
the AmqpInboundGateway provides inbound gateway capabilities.
And the AmqpOutboundEndpoint, which we saw in the last section,
provides outbound gateway capabilities with one small modification,
namely, telling it that we expect a response.
In order to create an inbound gateway, we first create a new channel.
Then we create a SimpleMessageListenerContainer,
as we did in the previous section.
Recall that the container handles the active responsibilities of
interacting with RabbitMQ so that listeners can remain passive.
It uses the provided ConnectionFactory to connect to RabbitMQ and
listen for messages on the specified queue.
Finally, we create an AmqpInboundGateway,
setting the request channel to the channel we just created and
providing it with the name of a reply channel.
Spring Integration will provide the reply queue configuration
to route the message back to the sender.
Creating the outbound gateway is almost identical to
creating the outbound channel adaptor.
We create a channel and an outbound endpoint,
but this time we set the AMQP outbound endpoint's
expectReply setting to true this way,
the outbound endpoint will wait for a response to the message that it's sending.
Finally,
we create a MessagingGateway that publishes a message to our
channel when the getAddress method is called.
It accepts a Long, which is the userId,
and returns the response from the AMQP call as a message.
Here's our example, which is in addition to the example in the previous section.
After the foo reservation service publishes a reservation to our
FooReservationListener through a RabbitMQ queue, the FooReservationListener
requests the address of the user in the reservation.
The idea is that while the foo reservation service
publishes information about the reservation,
the Globomantics Registration Service needs more information,
namely the user's address.
So it publishes a message requesting the address to the
AmqpOutboundEndpoint through the foo address channel.
The outbound endpoint publishes a message to Rabbit MQ's
exchange with a routing key of getAddress,
which is routed to the getAddress queue.
The AmqpInboundGateway receives the message,
invokes the AddressService to retrieve the address,
and returns it back to us.
So let's take a look at the code and run it to see the message
exchange between the two Java processes.
I updated the listener app by adding a new Spring configuration
class named RabbitMQOutboundGatewayConfig.
This class defines a new mMessageChannel named fooAddressChannel and then
creates an AmqpOutboundEndpoint that is invoked by a ServiceActivator when a
message is published to the foo address channel.
It accepts an amqpTemplate,
which again is created automatically when Spring
finds RabbitMQ in our class path,
and it creates the AmqpOutboundEndpoint with that template.
We then set ExpectReply to true,
which is the difference between using the endpoint as an outbound
gateway rather than as an outbound channel adaptor.
We set the routing key to the name of the address queue,
and then we create a new MessagingGateway that will publish messages to the
foo address channel when its getAddress method is called.
Notice that it will return a message.
This message will contain the response from the foo
reservation publisher application.
Next, the FooReservationListener wires in the addressGateway,
and when it receives a new reservation,
it makes a call to the addressGateway to retrieve the address
for this user and prints it out to the logs.
Switching over to the foo reservation publisher application,
I added a new Spring configuration class named FooAddressConfig
that creates a new MessageChannel to handle address requests and
then creates an AmqpInboundGateway bean.
Just as before, we create a
SimpleMessageListenerContainer that listens for messages,
but this time on the address queue.
The AmqpInboundGateway is configured to use that
SimpleMessageListenerContainer and publish the messages
that it receives to the RequestChannel,
which in this case is the getAddressInputChannel.
It sets the DefaultReplyTo to a new get address reply queue,
and Spring Integration will see this and route the response back to our client.
Finally, we create a new get address queue,
which will cause the creation of the queue in Rabbit MQ.
The AddressService is a Spring service with a
ServiceActivator listening for messages on the
getAddressInputChannel that simply returns the string,
this is my address.
In practice, we'd probably take the reservation ID,
look up the reservation in our database,
and return the corresponding address.
But the point of this exercise is to get the communication pathways working.
So let's run both applications and see the new gateway callback from the
reservation listener to the reservation publisher.
If we look at the reservation publisher logs we can see
each reservation being published, followed by a request for an address.
And in the reservation listener logs,
we see that the reservation is received and we see
the "this is my address" response.
In this section,
we reviewed AMQP and integrating a Spring Integration application with RabbitMQ.
First,
we saw how the AmqpInboundChannelAdapter is used to
implement an inbound channel adaptor and receive messages
that are published to a RabbitMQ queue.
Then we reviewed the AmqpOutboundEndpoint,
which can be used as both an outbound channel adapter to publish a
message to a RabbitMQ queue and as an outbound gateway,
which can be used to send a message to RabbitMQ and receive a response.
The only difference between the two uses is that we set the ExpectReply
value to true when using it as an outbound gateway.
Finally, we discussed the AmqpInboundGateway,
which is an inbound gateway that receives messages
published to a queue and returns a response.
Next up,
we're going to review integrating with ActiveMQ using Spring Integration's JMS support.